content/posts/statistic_lies.md, before:

---
title: "How to decieve using statistics"
date: 2022-08-29T15:01:17+02:00
show_reading_time: true
draft: false
featured_image: '/images/post_banners/statistics.jpeg'
katex: true

custom_table: true

tags: ["machine learning", "Python"]
summary: "It always bothers me when people sell some perentages they calculated some how as 'statistics', particularly in the media.

Thus, I would like this post to be a quick introduction, based on examples, on how manipluative some badly done statistics can be.
"
---

## 1. The Simpsons Paradox


This one is my absolute favourite!
If you see this the first time and it does not drop your jaw, then you are either much smarter than me or you may have to read it again :)

Let's consider the contentious topic of gender equality.
In my example, we shall consider a university. The administration wants to make sure that admissions are fair, so they gather some numbers and are shocked:

<table>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan = "2"><b></b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>male</b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>female</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>All Departments</td>
    <td>2701</td>
    <td>1204</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">44.6</td>
    <td>1835</td>
    <td>573</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">31.2</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<div class="boxWarning">It seems like women are disavantaged overall!</div>

It appears that women are significantly disavantaged in college addmissions.
The administration wants to figure out who is to blame.  
Now, the uni has 6 different departments (A-F), so the administration has a closer look into each one of these, to see who is to blame.

The results are unexpected:

<table>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan = "2"><b>Department</b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>male</b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>female</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>A</td>
    <td>825</td>
    <td>528</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">64.0</td>
    <td>108</td>
    <td>89</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">82.4</td>
  </tr>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>B</td>
    <td>560</td>
    <td>353</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">63.0</td>
    <td>25</td>
    <td>17</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">68.0</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>C</td>
    <td>325</td>
    <td>110</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E1E47B">33.8</td>
    <td>593</td>
    <td>202</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E1E47B">34.1</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>D</td>
    <td>417</td>
    <td>138</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">33.1</td>
    <td>375</td>
    <td>131</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">34.9</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>E</td>
    <td>201</td>
    <td>53</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">26.4</td>
    <td>393</td>
    <td>110</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">28.0</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>F</td>
    <td>373</td>
    <td>22</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">5.9</td>
    <td>341</td>
    <td>24</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">7.0</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<div class="boxWarning">It seems like men are disavantaged in every single department!</div>


The above is the crux of the Simpsons paradox. Even using the exact same raw-data. By simply grouping the data differently, one can obtain seemingly opposite insights. You can think of it as the gerrymandering of statistics ;)

In fact, I did not fully make up the above data, but took inspiration from the [Berkeley admission data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simpson's_paradox#Examples).

<!-- <div class="boxBell">Disclaimer</div>
<div class="boxCheck">Check</div>
<div class="boxComment">Comment</div>
<div class="boxHeart">Heart</div>
<div class="boxInfo">Info</div>
<div class="boxPlus">Plus</div>
<div class="boxStar">Star</div>
<div class="boxWarning">Warning </div> -->

Commit message:

Added plot to simpsons paradox.

content/posts/statistic_lies.md, after:

---
title: "How to decieve using statistics"
date: 2022-08-29T15:01:17+02:00
show_reading_time: true
draft: false
featured_image: '/images/post_banners/statistics.jpeg'
katex: true
plotly: true

custom_table: true

tags: ["machine learning", "Python"]
summary: "It always bothers me when people sell some perentages they calculated some how as 'statistics', particularly in the media.

Thus, I would like this post to be a quick introduction, based on examples, on how manipluative some badly done statistics can be.
"
---

## 1. The Simpsons Paradox


This one is my absolute favourite!
If you see this the first time and it does not drop your jaw, then you are either much smarter than me or you may have to read it again :)

Let's consider the contentious topic of gender equality.
In my example, we shall consider a university. The administration wants to make sure that admissions are fair, so they gather some numbers and are shocked:

<table>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan = "2"><b></b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>male</b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>female</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>All Departments</td>
    <td>2701</td>
    <td>1204</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">44.6</td>
    <td>1835</td>
    <td>573</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">31.2</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<div class="boxWarning">It seems like women are disavantaged overall!</div>

It appears that women are significantly disavantaged in college addmissions.
The administration wants to figure out who is to blame.  
Now, the uni has 6 different departments (A-F), so the administration has a closer look into each one of these, to see who is to blame.

The results are unexpected:

<table>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan = "2"><b>Department</b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>male</b></td>
    <td colspan="3"><b>female</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
    <td><b>applied</b></td>
    <td><b>accepted</b></td>
    <td><b>%</b></td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>A</td>
    <td>825</td>
    <td>528</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">64.0</td>
    <td>108</td>
    <td>89</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">82.4</td>
  </tr>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>B</td>
    <td>560</td>
    <td>353</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">63.0</td>
    <td>25</td>
    <td>17</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">68.0</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>C</td>
    <td>325</td>
    <td>110</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E1E47B">33.8</td>
    <td>593</td>
    <td>202</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E1E47B">34.1</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>D</td>
    <td>417</td>
    <td>138</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">33.1</td>
    <td>375</td>
    <td>131</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">34.9</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>E</td>
    <td>201</td>
    <td>53</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">26.4</td>
    <td>393</td>
    <td>110</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">28.0</td>
  </tr>

  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td><b>F</td>
    <td>373</td>
    <td>22</td>
    <td style="background-color:#E47B7B">5.9</td>
    <td>341</td>
    <td>24</td>
    <td style="background-color:#B4EFA3">7.0</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<div class="boxWarning">It seems like men are disavantaged in every single department!</div>


The above is the crux of the Simpsons paradox. Even using the exact same raw-data. By simply grouping the data differently, one can obtain seemingly opposite insights. You can think of it as the gerrymandering of statistics ;)

In fact, I did not fully make up the above data, but took inspiration from the [Berkeley admission data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simpson's_paradox#Examples).


### How does this happen?

To understand what is going on here, I prepared a little plot below.
The bar charts show the distribution of male and female applications. The black line shows the acceptance ratio per department. If you will, the "difficulty" of getting into any of these appartments.

In essence, males and females have drastically different preference in their choice of study department.
So, while female applicants are favoured in every single department, the vast majority of them applied to the very competitive departments with very low acceptance ratios. Males on the other hand, stongly favoured the "easy" departments. In Berkleys case, those were the engineering departments. So, even though males were still disadvantaged there, the fact that so many of them applied to department A and B, leads to there being more men in the university overall.

{{< plotly json="/plots/simpsons.json" height="400px" >}}


<div class="boxInfo">The Simpsons paradox shows that a trend that might show up in data that is put into grups, can disappear or even reverse when the groups ar combined. This is critical to understand if you want to interpret data correctly.</div>

<!-- <div class="boxBell">Disclaimer</div>
<div class="boxCheck">Check</div>
<div class="boxComment">Comment</div>
<div class="boxHeart">Heart</div>
<div class="boxInfo">Info</div>
<div class="boxPlus">Plus</div>
<div class="boxStar">Star</div>
<div class="boxWarning">Warning </div> -->
